feat(java): workflow context propagation quickstart (#1319)
dapr/quickstarts: tutorials/workflow/java/history-propagation/README.md

# Workflow History Propagation

> This tutorial demonstrates **workflow history propagation**, a Dapr 1.18 feature that lets a parent workflow share its execution history with child workflows and activities. Downstream services can inspect the propagated history to make trust-aware decisions — without any external state store or custom messaging.

Reviewer: docs link to https://github.com/dapr/docs/pull/5153

Author: Do you want to point to the PR or just to the new daprdocs/content/en/developing-applications/building-blocks/workflow/workflow-history-propagation.md ?

Reviewer: yes: https://docs.dapr.io/developing-applications/building-blocks/workflow/workflow-history-propagation/

> **Runtime requirement**: Dapr 1.18+ ([dapr/dapr#9810](https://github.com/dapr/dapr/pull/9810))
> **Java SDK requirement**: `dapr-spring-bom >= 1.18.0-rc-2` ([dapr/java-sdk#1739](https://github.com/dapr/java-sdk/pull/1739), backported in [dapr/java-sdk#1751](https://github.com/dapr/java-sdk/pull/1751))

> > **Proposal**: [dapr/proposals#102](https://github.com/dapr/proposals/issues/102)

Reviewer: remove all this

For more information about Dapr Workflows in general, see the [Dapr docs](https://docs.dapr.io/developing-applications/building-blocks/workflow/workflow-features-concepts/).

> ## Two propagation modes

Reviewer: Would remove this section link to docs

import io.dapr.durabletask.WorkflowResult;
import io.dapr.workflows.WorkflowTaskOptions;

// Parent — propagate LINEAGE when calling a child workflow
AuditResult audit = ctx.callChildWorkflow(
    ComplianceAuditWorkflow.class.getName(),
    rec,
    /* instanceId */ null,
    WorkflowTaskOptions.propagateLineage(),
    AuditResult.class).await();

// Parent — propagate OWN_HISTORY when calling an activity
DispenseResult dispense = ctx.callActivity(
    DispenseMedicationActivity.class.getName(),
    rec,
    WorkflowTaskOptions.propagateOwnHistory(),
    DispenseResult.class).await();

// Receiver (child workflow or activity) — read the propagated history
Optional<PropagatedHistory> historyOpt = ctx.getPropagatedHistory();
historyOpt.ifPresent(history -> {
    history.getScope();         // HistoryPropagationScope (LINEAGE | OWN_HISTORY)
    history.getWorkflows();     // List<WorkflowResult> — ancestor first, then own

    Optional<WorkflowResult> intake = history.getLastWorkflowByName(
        PatientIntakeWorkflow.class.getName());
    intake.flatMap(wf -> wf.getLastActivityByName(VerifyInsuranceActivity.class.getName()))
          .map(ActivityResult::isCompleted);
});
```

> > **Replay safety**: workflow code re-executes many times during durable execution. Use `ctx.getLogger()` inside workflow bodies for replay-safe logging; inside activities (which don't replay), `LoggerFactory.getLogger(...)` is fine.

Reviewer: would remove

## Run the tutorial

1. Use a terminal to navigate to the `tutorials/workflow/java/history-propagation` folder.

> 2. Build and run the project using Maven. This spins up a Dapr 1.18 sidecar via Testcontainers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Build and run the project using Maven. This spins up a Dapr sidecar via Testcontainers.
```

    ```bash
    mvn spring-boot:test-run
    ```

3. Use the POST request in the [`history-propagation.http`](./history-propagation.http) file to start the workflow, or use this cURL command:

    ```bash
    curl -i --request POST \
      --url http://localhost:8080/start \
      --header 'content-type: application/json' \
      --data '{
        "patientId": "P-1042",
        "name": "Jane Doe",
        "condition": "bacterial sinusitis",
        "medication": "amoxicillin",
        "dosage": 500
      }'
    ```

>     The app logs should show the three `PROPAGATION-DEMO` markers proving the feature works:

Reviewer: Add a mechanical markdown test here for the passing scenario

    i.d.s.e.h.PrescribeMedicationWorkflow   : PROPAGATION-DEMO: scope=LINEAGE workflows=1
    i.d.s.e.h.ComplianceAuditWorkflow       : PROPAGATION-DEMO: scope=LINEAGE workflows=2
    i.d.s.e.h.ComplianceAuditWorkflow       :   upstream activity VerifyInsurance: completed=true
    i.d.s.e.h.ComplianceAuditWorkflow       :   upstream activity CheckAllergies: completed=true
    i.d.s.e.h.ComplianceAuditWorkflow       :   upstream activity ScreenDrugInteractions: completed=true
    i.d.s.e.h.ComplianceAuditWorkflow       : APPROVED (risk=0.10, 2 workflow(s) verified)
    i.d.s.e.h.a.DispenseMedicationActivity  : PROPAGATION-DEMO: scope=OWN_HISTORY workflows=1
    i.d.s.e.h.a.DispenseMedicationActivity  : DISPENSED: rx-P-1042-... (amoxicillin 500mg) for patient P-1042
    ```

4. Use the GET request in the [`history-propagation.http`](./history-propagation.http) file to get the output, or use this cURL command:

    ```bash
    curl --request GET --url http://localhost:8080/output
    ```

5. The expected serialized output of the workflow is:

    ```json
    {"dispensed":true,"dispenseId":"rx-P-1042-<ts>","patientId":"P-1042","medication":"amoxicillin"}
    ```

> 6. Stop the application by pressing `Ctrl+C`.

Reviewer: Now that the happy path is done we need one "failed workflow history" scenario. Like what Cassie did here: https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts/pull/1315/changes#diff-ad6cc6d5624f0181b85e42eec74696026f2c5c727b5bf30d34b75c018ae10891R57

Thus call PrescribeMedicationWorkflow without wf history and then see the failure to VerifyInsurance/CheckAllergies etc?

Reviewer: Also needs a mechanical markdown test for the failed scenario

> ## What if I run this against Dapr < 1.18?

Reviewer: Dont need this either, just the initial call out that 1.18+ is required.

`ctx.getPropagatedHistory()` returns `Optional.empty()` everywhere. `ComplianceAuditWorkflow` then refuses to approve (can't verify upstream checks) and the workflow completes with `dispensed=false`. The tutorial's Testcontainers setup pins the sidecar to 1.18, so this only happens if you wire it to an older runtime manually.

> ## References

Reviewer: Remove this section

# Workflow History Propagation

> This tutorial demonstrates **workflow history propagation**, a Dapr 1.18+ feature that lets a parent workflow share its execution history with child workflows and activities. Downstream services can inspect the propagated history to make trust-aware decisions — without any external state store or custom messaging. See the [Dapr docs](https://github.com/dapr/docs/pull/5153) for the feature reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates **workflow history propagation**, a Dapr 1.18+ feature that lets a parent workflow share its execution history with child workflows and activities. Downstream services can inspect the propagated history to make trust-aware decisions — without any external state store or custom messaging. See the [Workflow history propagation](https://docs.dapr.io/developing-applications/building-blocks/workflow/workflow-history-propagation/) for the feature reference.
```
